CNN has learned that
Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu
is meeting with his war cabinet
just ahead of what
they anticipate
could be a potential attack from Iran.
It comes after an Israeli airstrike
hit the Iranian consulate
in Damascus, Syria,
last week,
killing a dozen
Iranian military officials.
The Pentagon says the top U.S.
general for the Middle
East is in Israel right
now, meeting with Israeli
military officials
about the security threats.
And the White House tells CNN
that officials
there are keeping a very close eye
on the situation
and are in constant communication
with Israel.
Let's get to the latest reporting
from our correspondents,
CNN international diplomatic editor
Nic Robertson
is joining us from Jerusalem.
And know
Toshiba Trend is over at the Pentagon.
Nic, first to you.
First of all,
what can you tell us
about this Israeli war cabinet meeting?
How concerned are Israelis right now
that Iran could launch an attack,
a retaliatory attack against Israel
There's a real concern, Wolf,
that Iran could do that in the coming
24 or 48 hours.
I've talked to various
intelligence sources in the region
at the moment.
They understand,
and this is what we're getting
from a lot of different sources,
that Iran is poised to respond.
Now, of course,
this could be Iran intentionally dis
informing,
putting disinformation out there
just to create that.
The sense of jitters
among the Israeli public here
among the leadership
in Israel
about precisely what they'll do,
and it's unclear what they'll do.
Will they respond
in straight back directly
to Israel themselves with the use proxies
to strike into Israel
with a strike,
Israeli interests
elsewhere in the region?
That's a question on people's
minds at the moment.
But that strength of an show of unity
and support between the United States
and Israel
is on display
today at a cancer airbase
in the south of Israel.
The CENTCOM commander,
General Eric Correll, up there
with your article
and the Israeli defense minister,
the deputy IDF chief of staff also there.
So this is very much a message of unity
and strength and preparedness
and this is what we heard from Rear
Admiral Daniel Hegarty,
the IDF spokesperson, just last night,
speaking about how prepared Israeli
is for whatever threat comes from Iran.
We're highly alert and prepared
for a wide range of scenarios
and are conducting
a situational assessment
We're ready in both defense and defense
with the various IDF
capabilities and strategic partners.
I'll take
you should give key
of Iran
a strike coming from Iranian territory
will clearly prove
that Iranian intentions
to escalate the situation
in the Middle East
and to stop hiding behind its proxies
And I think you get
a level of the understanding
of how this concern is shared
jointly between the United States
and Israel State Department
and the embassy here
warning staff
not to stray
beyond the sort of Tel Aviv area,
Jerusalem area, Sheva area,
stay in those areas.
The concern is it's just not clear
what Iran's move is going to be.
The sense that it could be soon, Wolf.
You know,
there's a lot of concern
in those embassy, the US embassy
and other embassies in Israel as well
are issuing warnings to their citizens
to stay put
basically
and worry
or start worrying about the potential.
Let's hope it doesn't happen
about the potential
of this war
escalating big time
between Israel and Iran.
Natasha, I want to go to the Pentagon
with you for a moment.
The top U.S.
military commander in the Middle East
the commander of the U.S.
military's Central Command is in Israel
right now.
We just heard Nick talk about that.
What do we know about his trip?
The coordination
that's going on between the United States
and Israel in anticipation
and fear of a formal a full scale Iranian
retaliatory response?
Well, Wolf, Eric
Parrilla the top general
for the Middle East,
he did say that the U.S.
and the Pentagon did say
also that the U.S.
stands with Israel
against any potential attack
that Iran might launch
against the Israelis.
And President Biden
made this very clear as well
that they are in constant coordination
with the Israelis
to prepare
for the possibility
that they do launch some kind of attack
directly on Israeli soil.
And according to a readout
from the Israeli side,
General Eric Carol,
he did meet with
you have got today
to discuss
readiness for an Iranian attack
against the state of Israel,
which may lead to regional escalation.
So clearly,
all sides here are bracing
for the possibility
that this escalates
into a full on conflict
between Iran and Israel.
However, U.S.
intelligence assessments,
as we reported
a little bit earlier in the week,
they assess that
this is more likely to be carried out
by Iranian proxy
forces in the region
rather than from Iran directly.
And that is for a number of reasons,
but most prominently
is because the Iranians don't
necessarily want to get involved
in a full blown war
with Israel,
that the US, as they have stated
publicly, would then come to Israel's
defense with.
So the Iranians trying to kind of temper
their response, according to our sources.
However, it is very possible
at this point,
according to intelligence assessments,
that these Iranian proxies
carry out attacks
against Israeli assets in the region.
And so all sides
kind of bracing for that and importantly,
how Israel is going to respond,
because that is also going to inform
just how much
this conflict escalates Wolf.
So, Natasha, just to be precise,
if Hezbollah,
an Iranian proxy in southern
Lebanon, starts
launching rockets and missiles, bombs
towards Haifa, Tel Aviv,
elsewhere in Israel,
the Israelis presumably
would respond big time against Hezbollah
in southern Lebanon
and try to destroy their capability,
but it wouldn't necessarily attack
directly Iranian targets in Iran.
Is that the U.S. understanding as well?
Well, it's
not clear just whether the U.S.
would characterize
an attack
by an Iranian proxy
against Israel as an attack
by Iran itself.
The U.S.
has made very clear,
of course, that the proxies
are only able to function
and really survive
because of Iranian support for them.
But at the same time,
it would definitely be a layer
removed from Iran itself.
If the proxies were the ones
carrying out these attacks.
However, Israel has said
that they are going to respond forcibly
to whatever kind of attack
they are faced with
by Iran or its proxies.
And so it just remains to be seen
how exactly this is going to play out
are very important, very,
very worrisome developments
unfolding right now. Natasha, thank you.
Nic, thanks to you as well.
I want to bring in CNN
military analyst, retired U.S.
Army Lieutenant General Mark Hertling.
General, thanks so much for joining us.
As you know, officials are telling CNN
they expect
Iran will respond
imminently, key word imminently.
Do you think Iran is likely to strike
Israel directly
or could that happen through a proxy
like Hezbollah? For example, in Lebanon?
Everyone's asking that question, Wolf.
And what I'd say is General Chiarelli
is there because he's looking at
what is the most dangerous
course of action that Iran will take.
And what's the most likely?
The most dangerous is a strike
by Iran inside of Israel,
because that could certainly cause
an inflection point and expand this war.
The most likely is all of your reporters,
Natasha just said, is likely an attack by
any number of proxy groups,
whether it's Hezbollah
in Lebanon
or any of the PMF forces in Iraq or Syria
or in the area.
So that's what General Khairallah
and probably
he has some of his intelligence officers
with them
as well as some of his operators
so that they can react with naval
and air forces from the U.S.
in case
anything does happen,
because the key is deterring
any further expansion
of this regional conflict.
The Israeli strike
on that Iranian consulate
building in Damascus
was, what, about a week or so ago?
Why do you think Iran
has not waited this long to respond?
They immediately issued warnings
that they were going to
respond, but they haven't yet
Well,
part of it
is the messaging that Iran often uses
and they're concerned
about attacking inside of Israel
because truthfully,
Wolf, as you know,
Israel force is pretty extensive
and pretty confident
they can certainly go
after Iranian forces
if they do these kind of things.
So I think Iran
is trying to get their proxies
together to determine
what would be the best
and most effective attacks
by their proxies
and potentially themselves
without being
deterred or countered
by any Israeli forces.
So, again, that's
why everyone is on the edge to see
which kind of force
Iran will use and how they will use it.